Move and rewrite Secure Access page from vintage (#2589)
giantswarm/docs: src/content/overview/security/secure-access/index.md

---
title: Secure access to clusters
description: Our team needs access to your clusters for management purposes. Here's how we make sure this access is secure and responsible.
weight: 30
menu:
  principal:
    parent: overview-security
last_review_date: 2025-05-15
aliases:
  - /vintage/platform-overview/security/cluster-security/cluster-access/
user_questions:
  - How do you access my infrastructure provider account?
  - How do you safeguard admin access to my clusters?
  - What is Teleport and how does it improve security?
  - What's the difference between user access and admin access?
  - How can I control access to my clusters?
  - Which APIs let me access my clusters?
  - How do I get access to my clusters?
  - Who can access my clusters?
  - Why does the Giant Swarm team need access to my clusters?
owner:
  - https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/team-shield
---

> You've got secure access to your workload clusters by default. To provide you with the best support, our team at Giant Swarm also needs access to these clusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You get secure access to your workload clusters by default. Our team at Giant Swarm also needs access to these clusters in order to provide you with the best support.
```

> This guide walks you through how this access works and the security measures implemented to ensure your clusters are managed securely and responsibly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide walks you through how this access works and the security measures we have implemented to ensure your clusters are managed securely and responsibly.
```

## Intro

> Let's talk about the two types of access to your Giant Swarm clusters:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are two broad types of access to your Giant Swarm clusters:
```

1. User access - this is for you and your team to interact with your services.

2. Admin access - this is for our team to help with management, development, and support.

Want to learn more about how our infrastructure works? Check out our [operational layers article]({{< relref "/overview/architecture/operational-layers" >}})

## User access

We expose the Kubernetes API of each workload cluster to you. You can [manage who gets access by connecting your external identity provider]({{< relref "/overview/architecture/authentication" >}}) to the Kubernetes API.

> ## Admin access via Teleport
> 
> ### What is Teleport?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Admin access via Teleport

Giant Swarm uses Teleport to access clusters for management and support.

### What is Teleport?
```

[Teleport](https://goteleport.com/) is an open-source tool that helps us manage secure access to your infrastructure. It uses an identity-aware reverse proxy and short-lived certificates instead of passwords or long-lived keys. This makes your clusters more secure and helps us follow regulations and work with different network setups.

> Teleport is awesome because it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Teleport is powerful because it:
```

> - Requires no open ports, publicly routable machines, or privileged bastion hosts

Author: ```suggestion
- Requires no open ports, publicly accessible machines, or privileged bastion hosts
```

- Works flexibly with our range of different customer network layouts
- Requires only outbound HTTPS traffic
- Uses short-lived, tightly scoped credentials
- Provides detailed audit logging to us and to our customers

### Teleport secured access points

We use Teleport to securely access:

> - **SSH** - Node access is proxied through Teleport, which authenticates the user and records the session without requiring personal SSH keys on customer machines.

Author: ```suggestion
- **SSH** - Node access is exposed through Teleport, which authenticates the user and records the session without requiring personal SSH keys on customer machines.
```

> - **SSH** - Node access is exposed through Teleport, which authenticates the user and records the session without requiring personal SSH keys on customer machines.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **SSH** - Nodes are accessed using Teleport, which authenticates the user and records the session without requiring personal SSH keys on customer machines.
```

- **Kubernetes API** - Management cluster and workload cluster Kubernetes API server access is auditable and can be fully private.

> - **Apps** - User interfaces for Giant Swarm apps are also proxied and protected by Teleport, minimizing the number of components that require public endpoints.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Apps** - User interfaces for Giant Swarm apps are also exposed and protected by Teleport, minimizing the number of components that require public endpoints.
```

Here's a diagram that shows how our Teleport setup works:

![Teleport Architecture](teleport.png)

We secure Teleport access with GitHub Single Sign-On (SSO) and multi-factor authentication. Only people in our GitHub organization can log in.

> We've built our Teleport cluster to be super reliable, and we keep detailed access and audit logs for every session.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We've built our Teleport cluster to be highly dependable, we also keep detailed access and audit logs for every session.
```

> We've built our Teleport cluster to be highly dependable, we also keep detailed access and audit logs for every session.

Reviewer 2: Either
```suggestion
We've built our Teleport cluster to be highly dependable; we also keep detailed access and audit logs for every session.
```
or
```
We've built our Teleport cluster to be highly dependable, and we keep detailed access and audit logs for every session.
```

### Infrastructure provider access

> You'll also need to grant our operators admin rights to your infrastructure provider so that we can manage your cluster's lifecycle - creating, configuring, and cleaning up resources like machines, networks, and security groups.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our Kubernetes operators also require admin rights to your infrastructure provider so that we can manage your cluster's lifecycle - creating, configuring, and cleaning up resources like machines, networks, and security groups.
```

Want to learn more about how our infrastructure works? Check out our [operational layers article]({{< relref "/overview/architecture/operational-layers" >}})

## User access

We expose the Kubernetes API of each workload cluster to you. You can [manage who gets access by connecting your external identity provider]({{< relref "/overview/architecture/authentication" >}}) to the Kubernetes API.

## Admin access via Teleport

### What is Teleport?

[Teleport](https://goteleport.com/) is an open-source tool that helps us manage secure access to your infrastructure. It uses an identity-aware reverse proxy and short-lived certificates instead of passwords or long-lived keys. This makes your clusters more secure and helps us follow regulations and work with different network setups.

Teleport is awesome because it:

- Requires no open ports, publicly routable machines, or privileged bastion hosts
- Works flexibly with our range of different customer network layouts
- Requires only outbound HTTPS traffic
- Uses short-lived, tightly scoped credentials
- Provides detailed audit logging to us and to our customers

> 
> ### Teleport at Giant Swarm
> 
> We've made Teleport our go-to solution for accessing the infrastructure we manage. It gives us better audit and access logs than we had before. The best part? Teleport identity-aware reverse proxy with TLS routing makes everything more straightforward and secure. You don't need a VPN anymore, and you don't have to open extra ports in your network. It works smoothly behind corporate firewalls—all you need is outbound HTTPS traffic to our Teleport cluster.

Author: ```suggestion
```

  - What is Teleport and how does it improve security?
  - What's the difference between user access and admin access?
  - How can I control access to my clusters?
  - Which APIs let me access my clusters?
  - How do I get access to my clusters?
  - Who can access my clusters?
  - Why does the Giant Swarm team need access to my clusters?
owner:
  - https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/team-shield
---

You've got secure access to your workload clusters by default. To provide you with the best support, our team at Giant Swarm also needs access to these clusters.

We'll walk you through how this access works and the security measures we've put in place to make sure your clusters are managed securely and responsibly.

## Intro

Let's talk about the two types of access to your Giant Swarm clusters:

1. User access - this is for you and your team to interact with your services.

2. Admin access - this is for our team to help with management, development, and support.

Want to learn more about how our infrastructure works? Check out our [operational layers article]({{< relref "/overview/architecture/operational-layers" >}})

## User access

> We expose the Kubernetes API of each workload cluster to you. You can manage who gets access by connecting your external identity provider to the Kubernetes API.

Reviewer 2: We can link to the [IdP/OIDC docs](https://docs.giantswarm.io/overview/architecture/authentication/) here
```suggestion
We expose the Kubernetes API of each workload cluster to you. You can [manage who gets access by connecting your external identity provider]({{< relref "/overview/architecture/authentication" >}}) to the Kubernetes API.
```

## Admin access via Teleport

### What is Teleport?

> [Teleport](https://goteleport.com/) is an open-source tool that helps us manage secure access to your infrastructure. It uses identity-aware reverse proxy and short-lived certificates instead of passwords or long-lived keys. This makes your clusters more secure and helps us follow regulations and work with different network setups.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Teleport](https://goteleport.com/) is an open-source tool that helps us manage secure access to your infrastructure. It uses an identity-aware reverse proxy and short-lived certificates instead of passwords or long-lived keys. This makes your clusters more secure and helps us follow regulations and work with different network setups.
```

> Here's why Teleport is awesome:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Teleport is awesome because it:
```

- Makes VPN architecture obsolete
- Works with more network layouts and gets around CIDR range limitations
- Boosts security
- Gives us detailed audit logs
- Lets you see the audit logs too

> ### Teleport at Giant Swarm

Reviewer 2: This section reads like a marketing pitch for teleport and mostly repeats the list above -- maybe the section could be removed

> We've made Teleport our go-to solution for accessing the infrastructure we manage. It gives us better audit and access logs than we had before. The best part? Teleport's identity-aware reverse proxy with TLS routing makes everything simpler and more secure. You don't need a VPN anymore, and you don't have to open extra ports in your network. It works smoothly behind corporate firewalls - all you need is outbound HTTPS traffic to our Teleport cluster.

Author: ```suggestion
We've made Teleport our go-to solution for accessing the infrastructure we manage. It gives us better audit and access logs than we had before. The best part? Teleport identity-aware reverse proxy with TLS routing makes everything more straightforward and secure. You don't need a VPN anymore, and you don't have to open extra ports in your network. It works smoothly behind corporate firewalls—all you need is outbound HTTPS traffic to our Teleport cluster.
```

### Teleport secured access points

Here's what we secure with Teleport:

> - **SSH** - We protect SSH access with the Teleport Node Agent.

Author: ```suggestion
- **SSH** - We protect SSH access with the Teleport (Node Agent).
```

> - **Kubernetes API** - We also secure the Kubernetes API on both management and workload clusters with the Teleport Kube Agent.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Kubernetes API** - We also secure the Kubernetes API on both management and workload clusters with the Teleport (Kube Agent).
```

> - **Kubernetes API** - We also secure the Kubernetes API on both management and workload clusters with the Teleport (Kube Agent).

Author: ```suggestion
- **Kubernetes API** - We also secure the Kubernetes API on both management and workload clusters with the Teleport Agent.
```

> Here's what we secure with Teleport:
> 
> - **SSH** - We protect SSH access with the Teleport Agent.
> 
> - **Kubernetes API** - We also secure the Kubernetes API on both management and workload clusters with the Teleport Agent.
> 
> - **Apps** - The Apps API on the management cluster gets the same Teleport protection.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We use Teleport to securely access:

- **SSH** - Node access is proxied through Teleport, which authenticates the user and records the session without requiring personal SSH keys on customer machines.
- **Kubernetes API** - Management cluster and workload cluster Kubernetes API server access is auditable and can be fully private.
- **Apps** - User interfaces for Giant Swarm apps are also proxied and protected by Teleport, minimizing the number of components that require public endpoints.
```

Here's a diagram that shows how our Teleport setup works:

![Teleport Architecture](teleport.png)

We secure Teleport access with GitHub SSO and multi-factor authentication. Only people in our GitHub organization can log in.

We've built our Teleport cluster to be super reliable, and we keep detailed access and audit logs for every session.

### Infrastructure provider access

> You'll need to grant our operators admin rights to your infrastructure provider. Why? So we can manage your cluster's lifecycle - creating, configuring, and cleaning up resources like machines, networks, and security groups.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You'll also need to grant our operators admin rights to your infrastructure provider so that we can manage your cluster's lifecycle - creating, configuring, and cleaning up resources like machines, networks, and security groups.
```

> Don't worry about security, though - we encrypt all authentication secrets in Etcd and protect access to etcd and the Kubernetes API with certificates signed by Teleport following strict policies.

Author: ```suggestion
Don't worry about security, though - we encrypt all authentication secrets in Etcd, and protect access to Etcd and the Kubernetes API with certificates signed by Teleport following strict policies.
```

> Don't worry about security, though - we encrypt all authentication secrets in Etcd, and protect access to Etcd and the Kubernetes API with certificates signed by Teleport following strict policies.

Reviewer 2: This is all wrong
```suggestion
```

> Don't worry about security though - we encrypt all authentication secrets in etcd, and we protect access to etcd and the Kubernetes API with certificates signed by Teleport following strict policies.

Author: ```suggestion
Don't worry about security, though - we encrypt all authentication secrets in Etcd and protect access to etcd and the Kubernetes API with certificates signed by Teleport following strict policies.
```
